DEVELOPMENTAL RESEARCH: STUDIES OF
INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
Rita C. Richey
Wayne State University
James D. Klein
Arizona State University
Wayne A. Nelson
Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
41.1 INTRODUCTION
The field of instructional technology has traditionally involved
a unique blend of theory and practice. This blend is most obvious in developmental research, those studies that involve the
production of knowledge with the ultimate aim of improving
the processes of instructional design, development, and evaluation. Such research is based on either situation-specific problem solving or generalized inquiry procedures. Developmental
research, as opposed to simple instructional development, has
been defined as “the systematic study of designing, developing
and evaluating instructional programs, processes and products
that must meet the criteria of internal consistency and effectiveness” (Seels & Richey, 1994, p. 127). In its simplest form,
developmental research can be either
 the study of the process and impact of specific instructional
design and development efforts; or
 a situation in which someone is performing instructional design, development, or evaluation activities and studying the
process at the same time; or
 the study of the instructional design, development, and evaluation process as a whole or of particular process components.
In each case the distinction is made between performing a process and studying that process. Reports of developmental research may take the form of a case study with retrospective
analysis, an evaluation report, or even a typical experimental
research report.
The purposes of this chapter are to
 explore the nature and background of developmental research;
 describe the major types of developmental research by examining a range of representative projects;
 analyze the methodological approaches used in the various
types of developmental research;
 describe the issues, findings, and trends in recent developmental research; and
 discuss the future of this type of research in our field.
41.2 THE NATURE OF DEVELOPMENTAL
RESEARCH
Today, even amid the calls for increased use of alternative research methodologies, the notion of developmental research is
1099
1100 • RICHEY, KLEIN, NELSON
often unclear, not only to the broader community of educational
researchers, but to many instructional technology researchers
as well. An understanding of this topic is rooted in the nature
of development and research in general, as well as a more specific understanding of the purpose, focus, and techniques of
developmental research itself.
41.2.1 The Character of Development
Development, in its most generic sense, implies gradual growth,
evolution, and change. This concept has been applied to diverse
areas of study and practice. For example, organization development is a strategy for changing “the beliefs, attitudes, values,
and structure of organizations so that they can better adapt to
new . . . challenges” (Bennis, 1969, p. 2). Educators are familiar
with the notion of professional or staff development. Lieberman
and Miller (1992) define this as “the knowledge, skills, abilities,
and the necessary conditions for teacher learning on the job”
(p. 1045). This same concept is often applied to other professional areas. In the corporate arena, the term “executive development” also refers to learning processes, and in this setting
learning, as a developmental activity, often integrates both classroom instruction and work experience (Smith, 1993). The most
common use of the term “development,” however, is in relation
to human growth and the field of developmental psychology.
The term developmental research is most often confused with
research in this field that concentrates on particular age groups,
such as in the areas of adolescent development or life-span development.
In the field of instructional technology, development has a
particular, somewhat unique, connotation. The most current
definition views development as “the process of translating the
design specifications into physical form” (Seels & Richey, 1994,
p. 35). In other words, it refers to the process of producing
instructional materials. Development is viewed as one of the five
major domains of theory and practice in the field.1 Even though
this varies from many other uses of the term development, it is
consistent with the fundamental attribute of being a process of
growth, and in our field development is a very creative process.
Historically development has been an ambiguous term to
many instructional technologists and has generated considerable discussion regarding its proper interpretation. This debate has focused typically on the distinctions between instructional design and instructional development. Heinich, Molenda,
Russell, and Smaldino (2002) define instructional development
as “the process of analyzing needs, determining what content
must be mastered, establishing educational goals, designing materials to reach the objectives, and trying out and revising the
program in terms of learner achievement” (p. 445). They have
been consistent in this orientation since the early editions of
their influential book. Yet to many, this is a definition of the
instructional systems design (ISD) process.
The confusion has been further exacerbated. In 1977, Briggs
defined instructional design as “the entire process of analysis of
1In addition to development, the domains also include design, management, utilization, and evaluation.
learning needs and goals and the development of a delivery system to meet the needs; includes development of instructional
materials and activities; and tryout and revision of all instruction
and learner assessment activities” (p. xx). In this interpretation
design is the more generic term, encompassing both planning
and production. The 1994 definition of the field attempts to clarify these issues by viewing design as the planning phase in which
specifications are constructed, and development as the production phase in which the design specifications are actualized
(Seels & Richey, 1994). This is not a new distinction (Cronbach
& Suppes, 1969; National Center for Educational Research and
Development, 1970), even though the past use of the term instructional developer (see Baker, 1973) typically referred to a
person who was doing what today we would call both design
and development. All would agree, however, that design and development are related processes, and Connop-Scollard (1991)
has graphically demonstrated these relationships in a complex
chart which identified hundreds of interrelated concepts.
However, the word development has a broader definition
when it is used within the research context than it has when
used within the context of creating instructional products. The
focus is no longer only on production, or even on both planning
and production. It also includes comprehensive evaluation. As
such, developmental research may well address not only formative, but also summative and confirmative evaluation. It may
address not only needs assessment, but also broad issues of frontend analysis, such as contextual analysis issues as conceived by
Tessmer and Richey (1997). When evaluation is approached in
a comprehensive manner, the scope of the research effort is
often correspondingly expanded to encompass product utilization and management, as well as product creation. Table 41.1
displays the scope of development as discussed in this chapter.
The next step beyond “Utilization & Maintenance” in the
Table 41.1 schemata would be “Impact,” the follow-up analysis
of the effects of an instructional product or program on the
organization or the learner. This type of research typically falls
within the scope of traditional evaluation research.
41.2.2 The Character of Research
Although research methodologies vary, there are key attributes
that transcend the various research orientations and goals. An
understanding of these characteristics can shed light on the
process of developmental research.
41.2.2.1 The Dimensions of Research. Research is typically viewed as a type of systematic investigation, and in education it typically is an empirical process that employs the systematic method (Crowl, 1996). One result of such efforts is the
creation of knowledge. Even though research is typically rooted
in societal problems, all knowledge produced by research is not
necessarily in a form conducive to quick resolution of society’s
problems. Some knowledge (which is usually generated by basic
research) must be specifically transformed to enable its application to a given problem. Other knowledge (which is usually
41. DEVELOPMENTAL RESEARCH • 1101
TABLE 41.1. The Scope of Development in a Research Context
Utilization &
Design Development Maintenance
Analysis and Planning for Production & Formative Usage, Management,
Development, Evaluation, Evaluation Summative &
Utilization, & Maintenance Confirmative Evaluation
generated by applied research) lends itself to the immediate
solution of practical problems. Developmental research clearly
falls in the latter category. In this respect, it is similar to other
methodologies such as action research.
Although the objective of research is to produce knowledge,
these products may take a variety of forms. Diesing (1991) has
noted that
. . . the philosophers suggest that social science produces at least three
kinds of knowledge: (1) systems of laws which describe interconnected
regularities in society; (2) descriptions, from the inside, of a way of life,
community, person, belief system, or scientific community’s beliefs;
(3) structural models, mathematical or verbal, of dynamic processes
exemplified in particular cases. (p. 325)
Research orientations tend to conform to the pursuit of a
particular type of knowledge. Experimental research tends to
contribute to the construction of a system of laws. Characteristic of this method is a series of routine checks to ensure selfcorrection throughout the research, and in the logical positivist
tradition, such checks are considered to be rooted in objectivity (Kerlinger, 1964). Qualitative research primarily contributes
to the development of “mirrors for man” so that we can see
ourselves better (Kluckhohn, as noted in Diesing, 1991). In the
various forms of qualitative research, context and contextual influences become an integral part of the investigation (Driscoll,
1991; Mishler, 1979).
Diesing’s third type of knowledge is process knowledge presented in model form. This is usually of great interest to instructional designers and developers, given our history of working
with many kinds of process models, such as the graphic models
of systematic design procedures and the models of media selection. When inquiry procedures result in this type of knowledge, these endeavors can legitimately be placed in the research
realm.
Another traditional characterization of research is as a facilitator of understanding and prediction. In this regard “understanding results from a knowledge of the process or dynamics of a
theory. Prediction results from investigation of the outcomes of
a theory” (Schwen, 1977, p. 8). These goals can be achieved
by either (a) providing a logical explanation of reality, (b) anticipating the values of one variable based on those of other
variables, or (c) determining the states of a model (Dubin, as
cited by Schwen, 1977). While these ends, especially the first
two, can be achieved through traditional research methodologies, the third is uniquely matched to the goals of developmental
research. This was emphasized by Schwen (1977):
Inquiry in educational technology may be associated with the planning,
implementing, and/or evaluation of the management-of-learning process, where that process employs systematic technological analysis and
synthesis . . . current definitions of technological process may be found
in development models . . . (having) the common attributes of 1) disciplined analysis of problem, context, constraints, learners, and task,
and 2) disciplined synthesis involving the design of replicable forms of
instruction and formative and summative evaluation. (p. 9)
41.2.2.2 The Relationships Between Research and Development. The traditional view of research is as the discovery
of new knowledge and that of development is as the translation
of that knowledge into a useful form (Pelz, 1967). This conceptual framework not only has been commonly subscribed to, but
was subsequently extended into the research, development, and
diffusion model (Brickell, Clark & Guba, as cited in Havelock,
1971). Early research methods texts addressed development as
the “research and development” process (Borg & Gall, 1971).
The processes were separate, though related, dependent, and
sequential. In some situations this orientation still prevails. This
view emphasizes development’s function of linking practice to
research and theory and recognizes the likelihood that instructional development can highlight researchable problems and,
thus, serve as a vehicle for stimulating new research (Baker,
1973).
Stowe (1973) has shown the parallels between scientific research and the general methodology of instructional systems
design (ISD). He notes that both
 are objective, empirical problem-solving approaches;
 employ procedural models “couched in the language of mathematics” (p. 167);
 have a predictive power dependent on the degree to which
they represent the most critical aspects of reality; and
 can generate new problems and hypotheses.
Nonetheless, Stowe rejected the proposition that systematic
design procedures can be viewed as research to a great extent
because of the inability of ISD to discover generalizable principles and its intent to produce context-specific solutions. In
addition, Stowe cited the distinctions between ISD’s orientation toward explanations of “how” as opposed to research’s
orientation toward explanations of “why.”
In the contemporary orientation toward research, Stowe’s
arguments can be interpreted as an overly rigid expression of
positivist philosophy. The contextual richness of the typical design and development task increases the likelihood that research
on such topics be especially ripe for a qualitative orientation.
The ability to provide process explanations exemplifies a type of
knowledge production using the Diesing framework, and an avenue to understanding and prediction using Schwen’s paradigm.
Stowe’s arguments, drafted 30 years ago, could lead to diametrically opposite conclusions today, providing one accepts the
1102 • RICHEY, KLEIN, NELSON
premise that research can have a broader function than the creation of generalizable statements of law. We are taking the position that research can also result in context-specific knowledge
and can serve a problem-solving function. This is true of developmental research, as it has commonly thought to be true of
evaluation research.
While instructional development typically builds on previous research, developmental research attempts to produce the
models and principles that guide the design, development, and
evaluation processes. As such, doing development and studying
development are two different enterprises.
41.2.3 The Background of Developmental Research
The field of instructional technology as it exists today emerged
primarily from a convergence of the fields of audiovisual education and instructional psychology. In audiovisual education
the emphasis was on the role of media as an enhancement of
the teaching/learning process and an aid in the communication
process, and there was much interest in materials production.
On the other hand, in instructional psychology the nature of
the learner and the learning process took precedence over the
nature of the delivery methodology, and there was much interest in instructional design. Complementing the instructional
psychology roots was the application of systems theory to instruction that resulted in the instructional systems design movement (Seels & Richey, 1994). This conceptual and professional
merger came to fruition in the 1960s and 1970s. During this
period instructional design and development came to assume
the role of the “linking science” that John Dewey had called for
at the turn of the century (Reigeluth, 1983).
Not surprisingly, it was during this same period that the
term developmental research emerged. This new orientation
was exemplified by the shift in topics between the first and
the second Handbook of Research on Teaching (Gage, 1963;
Travers, 1973). In the 1963 handbook, media was addressed as
an area of research with a major emphasis on media comparison research, and all research methodologies considered were
quantitative. In the 1973 handbook, media continued to be included as a research area, but the research methodologies were
varied, including Eva Baker’s chapter on “The Technology of Instructional Development.”2 This chapter describes in detail the
process of systematic product design, development, and evaluation. Of significance is the fact that the entire methodology
section was titled “Methods and Techniques of Research and
Development”.
This was a period in which federal support of educational
research mushroomed. Regional research and development laboratories were established and the ERIC system was devised for
dissemination. Clifford (1973) estimated that appropriations for
educational “research and development for 1966 through 1968
alone equaled three-fourths of all funds ever made available”
(p. 1). Research-based product and program development had
2A history of instructional development is given by Baker (1973), who primarily summarizes the work in research-based product development from
the turn of the century to 1970. Baker, however, does not address developmental research as it is presented in this chapter.
become firmly established as part of the scientific movement in
education. At this time, Wittrock (1967) hailed the use of empirical measurement and experimentation to explain product
effectiveness. Such activities “could change the development of
products into research with empirical results and theory generalizable to new problems” (p. 148).
Hilgard (1964) characterized research as a continuum from
basic research on topics not directly relevant to learning through
the advocacy and adoption stages of technological development. Saettler (1990) maintained that the last three of Hilgard’s research categories were directly within the domain of
instructional technology. These included laboratory, classroom,
and special teacher research; tryout in “normal” classrooms;
and advocacy and adoption. Note that these are portrayed as
types of research, rather than applications of research, and they
are all encompassed within the framework of developmental
research.
Although instructional technology is not the only field concerned with learning in applied settings, few would dispute
the critical role played by these three types of research in our
field. Moreover, our uniqueness among educational fields is not
only our concern with technology, but rather our emphasis on
the design, development, and use of processes and resources for
learning (Seels & Richey, 1994). Given this definition of the field,
developmental research is critically important to the evolution
of our theory base.
41.2.4 The Character of Developmental Research
The distinctions between “doing” and “studying” design and
development provide further clarification of developmental research activities. These distinctions can be described in terms
of examining the focus, techniques, and tools of developmental
research.
41.2.4.1 The Focus of Developmental Research. The general purposes of research have been described as knowledge
production, understanding, and prediction. Within this framework, developmental research has particular emphases that vary
in terms of the extent to which the conclusions are generalizable
or contextually specific. Table 41.2 portrays the relationships
between the two general types of developmental research.
The most straightforward developmental research projects
fall into the first category in Table 41.2. This category typically
involves situations in which the product development process
used in a particular situation is described and analyzed and
the final product is evaluated, such as McKenney’s (2002)
documentation of the use of CASCADE-SEA, a computer-based
support tool for curriculum development. Driscoll (1991) has
used the term systems-based evaluation to describe a similar
research paradigm. van den Akker (1999), on the other hand,
prefers to label Type I research formative research. He further
defines this type of research as “activities performed during
the entire development process of a specific intervention,
41. DEVELOPMENTAL RESEARCH • 1103
TABLE 41.2. A Summary of the Two Types
of Developmental Research
Type 1 Type 2
Emphasis Study of specific product or
program design,
development, &/or
evaluation projects
Study of design,
development, or
evaluation processes,
tools, or models
Product Lessons learned from
developing specific
products and analyzing
the conditions that
facilitate their use
New design, development,
and evaluation
procedures &/or models,
and conditions that
facilitate their use
Context-specific Generalized
Conclusions ⇒⇒⇒⇒ Conclusions
from exploratory studies through (formative and summative)
evaluation studies” (p. 6).
Some Type 1 developmental studies reflect traditional evaluation orientations in which the development process is not
addressed, and only the product or program evaluation is described. An example of this type of study is O’Quin, Kinsey, and
Beery’s (1987) report on the evaluation of a microcomputer
training workshop for college personnel. Regardless of the nature of the Type 1 study, the results are typically context and
product specific, even though the implications for similar situations may be discussed.
The second type of developmental study is oriented toward a general analysis of design, development, or evaluation
processes, addressed either as a whole or in terms of a particular component. They are similar to those studies Driscoll
(1991) calls “model development and technique development
research.” van den Akker (1999) calls them “reconstructive studies.” His term emphasizes the common (but not exclusive) situation in which this research takes place after the actual design
and development process is completed.
Tracey’s (2002) study is an example of Type 2 developmental
research that has a global design orientation. She constructed
and validated an instructional systems design model that incorporated Gardner’s notion of multiple intelligences. Taylor and
Ellis’(1991) study had a similar orientation, although their orientation was far different. They evaluated the use of instructional
systems design in the Navy. Other studies in this category focus on only one phase of the design/development/evaluation
process, such as Jonassen’s (1988) case study of using needs
assessment data in the development of a university program.
Type 2 research may draw its population either from one target
project such as King and Dille’s (1993) study of the application
of quality concepts in the systematic design of instruction at
the Motorola Training and Education Center or from a variety of
design and development environments. Examples of the latter
approach include Riplinger’s (1987) survey of current task analysis procedures and Hallamon’s similar study conducted in 2001.
Typically, conclusions from Type 2 developmental research are
generalized, even though there are instances of context-specific
conclusions in the literature.
41.2.4.2 Nondevelopmental Research in the Field. A critical aspect of any concept definition is the identification of
nonexamples as well as examples. This is especially important
with respect to developmental research, as it often seems to
overlap with other key methodologies used in the field. Even
so, developmental research does not encompass studies such
as the following:
 instructional psychology studies,
 media or delivery system comparison or impact studies,
 message design and communication studies,
 policy analysis or formation studies, and
 research on the profession.
While results from research in these areas impact the development process, the study of variables embedded in such
topics does not constitute developmental research. For example, design and development is dependent on what we know
about the learning process. We have learned from the research
literature that transfer of training is impacted by motivation,
organizational climate, and previous educational experiences.
Therefore, one may expand a front-end analysis to address such
issues, or even construct design models that reflect this information, but the foundational research would not be considered
developmental. If the new models were tested, or programs designed using such models were evaluated, this research would
qualify as developmental.
A fundamental distinction should be made between reports
that analyze actual development projects and descriptions of
recommended design and development procedural models. Although these models may represent a synthesis of the research,
they do not constitute research in themselves. A good example
of the latter situation is Park and Hannafin’s (1993) guidelines
for designing interactive multimedia. These guidelines are generalized principles that speak to the development process, and
they are based on a large body of research. Nonetheless, the
identification and explanation of the guidelines is not in itself
an example of developmental research. The instructional technology literature includes many examples of such work. They often provide the stimulus for a line of new research, even though
these articles themselves are not considered to be research reports themselves. There are many examples today of such work,
including explorations of topics such as cognitive task analysis
(Ryder & Redding, 1993) and the nature of design and designer
decision making (Rowland, 1993)