Denzin’s Paradigm Shift: Revisiting Triangulation in Qualitative
Research
Patricia Fusch
Walden University
Gene E. Fusch
Walden University
Lawrence R. Ness
Walden University
One approach to promote social change, mitigate bias, and enhance reaching data saturation
is through triangulation: multiple sources of data. Triangulation adds depth to the data that
are collected. In this scholarly essay, the authors discuss the continuing relevance of Denzin’s
approach to triangulation of data. Included is a critique of researchers who have posited
other approaches to triangulation that appear to be merely a renaming of Denzin’s original
paradigm rather new outcomes. The intended audience is novice researchers and doctoral
students who can benefit from clarity on some common misconceptions about triangulation.
Keywords: triangulation, Denzin, validity, reliability, confirmability, transferability, qualitative
research, multiple data source, multiple data collection methods, mitigating bias, data saturation,
social change
Introduction
Researchers often use a qualitative methodology to address social change despite the fact that most
research does not study social change, per se. For example, Christensen’s disruptive innovations
have had a major impact on industry structures, but the social changes are, for the most part,
accidental and a byproduct of the adaptions (Christensen, Baumann, Ruggles, & Sadtler, 2006). In
qualitative research, researchers accept that they cannot separate themselves from the research by
bringing their personal experiences, values, and perspectives (Jackson, 1990). In other words,
qualitative researchers bring their bias to the research, share their bias with the reader, and strive
to mitigate their personal bias to ensure that they are correctly interpreting the other/participant.
Likewise, Denzin (1978) argued that researchers bring their personal beliefs in addition to the social
and political environment, which eliminates any possibility of conducting value-free research.
Moreover, researchers often use a qualitative methodology to address social change, but struggle
with concepts of objectivity, truth, and validity.
Social science asks the following questions: Can social science be objective? Whose truth? Whose
perspective of validity? Some qualitative researchers support to the postpositivist terms or reliability
and validity, whereas others use the notion of dependability, credibility, transferability, and
confirmability (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Whether one is looking at qualitative research from a
postpositivist, postmodernist, or other paradigm, it is vital to address one’s position in the research
and show how one will ensure the trustworthiness of the research.
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 20
One purpose of any study is to advance theory (Imenda, 2014) through either filling a gap (Vlok,
2012) or confirming already existing evidence (Ayoko & Pekerti, 2008). This is then accomplished by
an exhaustive literature review, an empirical study to gather the evidence, and then comparing the
existing body of knowledge and the conceptual framework to the study results (Chernyak-Hai &
Tzinder, 2014; Secomb & Smith, 2011). The overall purpose of any study is to answer the research
question.
One approach to mitigate bias is through triangulation: multiple sources of data (Jonsen & Jehn,
2009). In qualitative research, triangulation adds depth to the data that is collected. This rich, indepth data supports a direct link between triangulation and data saturation (P. Fusch & Ness,
2015). Denzin (2011) made the point that it is somewhat like looking through a crystal to perceive all
the facets/viewpoints of the data. Moreover, he posited that triangulation should be reframed as
crystal refraction (many points of light) to extrapolate the meaning inherent in the data, thereby
mitigating one’s bias. This is especially important in qualitative research when one is using multiple
data collection techniques to find the meaning that participants use to frame their world (Forsey,
2010). Using strategies such as Denzin's triangulation techniques can assist with endeavors to
understand the other. A researcher's cultural and experiential background contains biases, values,
and ideologies that will have an influence on the interpretation of the study results (G. Fusch, 2001).
Qualitative Research and Triangulation
The application of triangulation (multiple sources of data) can enhance the reliability of the study
results (Stavros & Westberg, 2009) and enable one to saturate the data (P. Fusch & Ness, 2015).
Denzin (1989) noted that triangulation involves the employment of multiple external data collection
methods concerning the same events may be enhanced by multiple external analysis methods.
Triangulation is one method by which the researcher analyzes data and then presents the results to
others to understand the experience of a common phenomenon (Denzin, 1989)
A qualitative researcher seeks to define and interpret unclear phenomena through nonnumerical
methods of measurement that focus on meaning and insight (Kakabadse & Steane, 2010).
Exploratory research designs are conducted to clarify ambiguity and discover multiple realities
(Kurt, Inman, & Argo, 2011), as well as ideas for later research. Therefore, qualitative research
techniques help researchers define and interpret the ambiguities that exploratory research designs
address (Thomas & Quinlan, 2014). Exploratory research can include interpretations of information
gathered during investigations that consist of unstructured interviews, in-depth interviews, and
direct observation of people, places, and phenomena (Dowlatshahi, 2010; Mansourian, 2008). Finally,
exploratory research is used when the problem statement is unclear or inarticulate (Dowlatshahi,
2010).
Jackson (1990) discussed subjectivity in qualitative research and in particular cultural anthropology
in her self-professed nonrandom sample of seventy anthropologists. The concept of "I am a fieldnote"
or "I am the research instrument" focuses on the self in qualitative research. Researchers bring their
personal milieu and values, which demonstrates subjectivity and relationships between
insider/outsider and researcher/participant, further noting that some see this as strength, while
others see it as a weakness (Draper & Swift, 2011). These relationships are present in all social
research, both intentionally and unintentionally (Fields & Kafai, 2009). Jackson (1990) wrote that
the personal reactions of Western anthropologists to native cultures should be of interest to
researchers in addition to the study at hand. As Denzin and Lincoln (2011) stated, “qualitative
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 21
research scholars have an obligation to change the world [to make] a positive difference. We are
challenged to confront the facts of injustice… and hence open to change and transformation” (p. 511).
It is what Gergen, Josselson, and Freeman (2015) referred to as the promise of qualitative inquiry, to
promote social change by increasing knowledge and challenging conventions, to know with others as
well as about them. It is the ability to promote social change through emancipatory action (Gergen &
Zielke, 2006; MacDonald, 2012).
To enhance social change through research, it is imperative that interpretations represent those of
the participants and not of the researcher (Fields & Kafai, 2009). Draper and Swift (2011) made two
good points in their work: (a) there is no universal accepted design for data collection, and (b) the
researcher plays a central, key role in the data collection phase of the study. Fields and Kafai (2009)
also made these points in their discussion of ethnographic research designs. One of the most
challenging parts in qualitative research is to account for the use of a personal lens, primarily
because novice researchers (like students) assume that they have no bias in their data collection.
However, it is important to remember that a participant’s, as well as the researcher’s,
bias/worldview is present in all social research, both intentionally and unintentionally (Fields &
Kafai, 2009), which is why it is important to triangulate in qualitative research.
Denzin’s Paradigm Shift: Triangulation in Qualitative Research
Triangulation is an important concept regarding data analysis for an empirical study. To be sure,
multiple external analysis methods concerning the same events and the validity of the process can be
enhanced by triangulation (G. Fusch, 2001; P. Fusch & Fusch, 2015; P. Fusch & Ness, 2015;
Marshall & Rossman, 2016). The importance of triangulation cannot be underestimated to ensure
reliability and validity of the data and results .
External validity is represented by the ability of a study’s conclusions to be transferred to other
studies (Aastrup & Halldorsson, 2013). This should be possible regardless of populations, settings, or
times (Aastrup & Halldorsson, 2013). Although external validity can be defined as transferring the
findings of one study to other studies, qualitative researchers often prefer to use the concept of
transferability to avoid the more positivist concept of generalizability (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). One
should leave the transferability of the findings to the reader and future researchers to determine
rather than the original researcher (Marshall & Rossman, 2016). A study has construct validity if
the inferences that are made can be tied to the conceptual framework of the study (Amerson, 2011).
Moreover, threats to construct validity are demonstrated by researcher bias and relying on a single
measurement instrument (Amerson, 2011). Construct validity is proven by using multiple sources of
data (triangulation), preserving the chain of evidence, and allowing key informants to review the
data (Amerson, 2011). External validity is demonstrated by the ability of the study to be replicated,
known as transferability (Roe & Just, 2009).
What is important to remember is that the researcher mitigates bias through the data collection
method that is appropriate for the study design. Hearing and understanding the perspective of others
may be one of the most difficult dilemmas that face the researcher. The better a researcher is able to
recognize his/her personal view of the world and to discern the presence of personal lenses, the better
one is able to hear and interpret the behavior and reflections of others. For example, the use of
methodological triangulation (multiple methods of data collection) will also assist in mitigating any
researcher bias (Bekhet & Zauszniewski, 2012; Gorissen, van Bruggen, & Jochems, 2013; Horne &
Horgan, 2012: Lloyd, 2011). The ability to look at the data from multiple perspectives and consider a
phenomenon in more than one way assists in mitigating the potential to see the data from just one
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 22
view (Denzin, 1989). Using triangulation such as multiple sources of data contributes to the
reliability of results (Stavros & Westberg, 2009) and saturation of data (P. Fusch & Ness, 2015). A
case study design with at least two data collection methods (Amerson, 2011; Houghton, Casey, Shaw,
& Murphy, 2013) is one example of methodological triangulation.
Qualitative researchers have special concerns regarding validity (Cho & Trent, 2011) and a key
concept of reliability is the ability of instruments to elicit a response that remains constant over time
(Golafshani, 2003). Beginning with the geometrical concept of triangulation used for centuries in
ship navigation in which one draws the intersection between three known points to locate the ships
position, Campbell and Fiskel (1959)—and later, Webb, Campbell, Schwartz, and Sechrest (1966)—
introduced the notion of triangulating multiple sources of data to enhance the validity of research.
Four Types of Triangulation
Denzin (1970, 1978) built on the notion of triangulating multiple sources of data and developed four
types of triangulation that qualitative researchers can use to enhance the enhance objectivity, truth,
and validity (dependability and credibility) of social research. Denzin (1989) suggested data
triangulation for correlating people, time, and space; investigator triangulation for correlating the
findings from multiple researchers in a study; theory triangulation for using and correlating multiple
theoretical strategies; and methodological triangulation for correlating data from multiple data
collection methods.
Data triangulation
Data triangulation is often confused for methodological triangulation and is most likely the most
frequent mistake that students make when discussing triangulation. An abbreviated way to think
about data triangulation to avoid confusion is to consider what Denzin (2009) referred to as people,
time, and space. These three data points (not methods to generate data) are inter-related and
ongoing. Each data point represents different data of the same event; discovering commonalities
within dissimilar settings. Furthermore, the data points take place over time to observe ongoing
interactions—days, weeks, months, years.
Investigator triangulation
Simply put, there is more than one investigator/researcher exploring the phenomenon. Denzin (2009)
pointed out that this does not include coders, graduate students/assistants, or data analysts. Rather,
the persons with the best skills should be closest to the data. Bias is mitigated by different
investigators observing the same data who may not agree on its interpretation
Theory triangulation
In theory triangulation, one applies different theories and alternative theories to the data set.
Particularly, one views the data through a theoretical lens and through contradictory theories.
Another strategic approach is to let the raw data speak to the researcher to ascertain a new theory.
The point, as noted by Denzin (2009), is to widen one’s theoretical lens through a six-step process
that expands one’s knowledge of the known.
Methodological triangulation
Denzin (1970, 1978) noted that methodological triangulation can be within method or between
method (also known as across method), although the generally understood type is within method,
such as multiple sources of data found within one design. For example, triangulating the data from
multiple data collection methods (interviews, focus groups, observations, etc.) in a qualitative case
study or ethnography would be within-method triangulation, whereas triangulating the data from a
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 23
combination of quantitative and qualitative techniques in a mixed-methods study would be betweenmethod (or across method) triangulation. The challenge is that the inherent flaws within one method
are still present and can impact the data. The ideal application, Denzin (2009) stated, is betweenmethod triangulation to account for flaws and deficiencies. Between-method triangulation takes the
best of both to overcome the weakness of each. In-depth understanding of the phenomenon is the
goal; validity is not always enhanced.
Figure 1. The four types of triangulation. Source: P. Fusch and Fusch (2013)
The Importance of Triangulation
The importance of triangulation cannot be underestimated to ensure reliability and validity of the
data and results. This occurs when the data is accurate and truthful (Roe & Just, 2009), when the
inferences have a reasonable probability for actually occurring and can be tied back to the conceptual
framework of the study (Roe & Just, 2009), and by the ability of a study’s conclusions to be
transferred to other studies regardless of populations, settings, or times (Aastrup & Halldorsson,
2013). It goes without saying that the study design is the most important component of the
proposal—to ensure that one has the best opportunity to answer the research question (Marshall &
Rossman, 2016).
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 24
Researcher bias/worldview is a concern whether from the standpoint of the researcher or the
participant (Chenail, 2011). Chenail (2011) pointed out that the establishment and implementation
of an interview protocol is important to mitigate bias, especially if the researcher is also a member of
the population pool being studied. Miscommunication between participants and researchers can
especially arise from misunderstandings between the two (Chenail, 2011). This is especially
apparent during an interview process, during which cultural differences can manifest in
communication, making the use of an interview protocol important (Amerson, 2011).
It would be impossible to remove all bias because one is a human being. Rather, one mitigates bias as
best as one can (Amerson, 2011; Chenail, 2011). This is demonstrated through the use of an
interview protocol, member checking, data saturation, and other strategies to mitigate the use of one
personal lens during the data collection process of the study (Dibley, 2011; Torrance, 2012). Driving
participants to predetermined conclusions speaks to the same concepts (Dibley, 2011). With oneself
as a lens, a researcher observes and interacts with members of a culture to understand the culture,
and then disseminates the researcher's interpretations to those outside the culture (P. Fusch, Ness,
& Fusch, 2017).
The easiest way to differentiate between rich and thick data is to think of rich as quality and thick as
quantity. Thick data is a lot of data; rich data is many-layered, intricate, detailed, nuanced, and so
on. One can have a lot of thick data that is not rich; conversely, one can have rich data but not a lot
of it. The challenge, if you will, is to have both.
Methodological Triangulation: Mixed Methods and Blended Designs
Methodological triangulation adds depth to the data that is collected (Manganelli et al., 2014); it is
perhaps the most frequent use of triangulation by students. Its use is especially important in
qualitative research designs, in which one may have multiple data collection techniques to find the
meaning that participants use to frame their world (Forsey, 2010). Some of the options that are
available to students for methodological triangulation include interviews, focus groups, direct
observation, document analysis (Internet, Intranet, company documents, and other media),
participant observation, and field notes.
Mixed methods
For mixed methods, one uses between-method triangulation. Mixed methods combines both
quantitative and qualitative methods (Almajali & Dahalin, 2011; Fielding, 2012; Hussein, 2009). A
mixed-methods design has so much going for it—rich data, ability to reach data saturation easily, a
comprehensive presentation of the study results (Green et al., 2015). However, along with its
benefits, a mixed-methods design has a great deal of complexity in the data collection methods—
much more than other designs (Baran, 2010; Bryman, 2008). One would have to have a great deal of
knowledge regarding quantitative design as well as qualitative design (Halcomb & Andrew, 2009),
which is not typically the case with novice researchers.
Sometimes a mixed-methods strategy begins with a qualitative framework to fine-tune the questions
to be asked in the quantitative phase (Baran, 2010). Regardless of the protocol, there is a distinct
viewpoint where one design is dominant over the other (Baran, 2010; Bryman, 2008). As Bryman
pointed out, mixed-methods research in the abstract is far different from how it is utilized in the
field. Often, a mixed-methods study will begin with a qualitative method to identify and narrow
down the problem. Then the quantitative method is used to answer the research question. This
process can be reversed as well. Mixed methods is often described as methodological pluralism in
that the use of both results in a broader perspective of the research topic (Azorin & Cameron, 2010)
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 25
as opposed to what are known as monomethods—qualitative or quantitative (Baran, 2010). Finally,
Denzin (2012) was somewhat critical of mixed-methods research, often referring to it as naïve
postpositivism, although he appears to have softened his approach.
Blended design
Blended designs combine qualitative designs, for example, an ethnographic case study, a narrative
case study design, or a grounded-theory case study design. To be sure, it is not that mixed methods is
inherently difficult; it is that the approach should be one that answers the research question.
Blended designs and mixed methods are often confused as being the same thing; however, the
differences are important. A blended design remains within the same method; a mixed-methods
approach is two methods, which makes it far more complicated than a blended design. A mixedmethods design will still reflect either a quantitative framework or a qualitative one (Baran, 2010;
Bryman, 2008) because a quantitative mind set is different from a qualitative mindset in so many
ways (Baran, 2010). That is why mixed methodology is often discouraged for novice researchers such
as students, because the thought process can be too complicated at times.
Typically, students think of blending as using a mixed-methods approach to research design;
however, some students do not see that one can blend designs through using a phenomenological
interview design with a case study approach. Another way to look at blending designs is to use a
miniethnographic case study design (P. Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2017). One has the benefit of an
ethnographic approach that is bounded within a case study protocol that is more feasible for a
student researcher with limited time and finances.
A blended design is often not an option mentioned to students because of its confusion with mixed
methods; however, a blended design is an excellent way to obtain rich and thick data and is
occasionally the answer when students are too often discouraged from conducting phenomenological
studies. The challenge for students is to understand how to present the option to a reluctant
committee; a phenomenological case study design can be seen from two perspectives: a case study
design with phenomenological interviews or a phenomenological study that is bounded in time and
space by a case study design. Reaching the point of saturating the data is much easier with case
study design than with phenomenology. One further point we would add is that one can bound
phenomenology with the sampling method. Another example is that the pairing of ethnography with
case study design is a good choice because one can bind the ethnographic study within time and
space with the case study design. Typically, ethnographers are in the field for years. If one were to
pair it with case study design, one can then limit the time in the field to a timeframe that is more
pragmatic for novice researchers such as students.
The Postparadigm Shift
Since Denzin initially defined the four types of triangulation in social research, there has been
confusion between data triangulation and methodological triangulation. Many writers have
attempted to expand on Denzin’s original work by attaching new names to the same concepts that
Denzin discussed (Carter, Bryant-Lukosius, DiCenso, Blythe, & Neville, 2014; Humble, 2009;
Wilson, 2014) or noting how triangulation appears to be another name for mixed-methods research.
For example, Guion, Diehl, and McDonald’s (2011) cooperative extension publication presents the
concept of environmental triangulation. The publication was originally written as an undergraduate
paper and then expanded on by others.
Upon a careful reading of the discussion, one finds that environmental triangulation is actually a
renaming of the concepts found within data triangulation. For example, Guion et al. (2011) noted
Fusch, Fusch, & Ness, 2018
Journal of Social Change 26
that environmental triangulation involves the use of multiple locations, settings, and other factors,
which is too similar to Denzin’s discussion of people, time, and space of data triangulation.
Moreover, one also finds that their discussion related to data triangulation is a surface level
presentation that does not correctly define what data triangulation is and is not. Much of the
discussion found in Guion et al. would be better applied to methodological triangulation. This is why
it is so important to return to the primary source to understand the concepts of triangulation by
reading Denzin’s (1970) seminal work.
The Triangulation Confusion
Frequently, we see confusion in qualitative research between data triangulation versus
methodological triangulation. This appears to be an outcome of reading secondary data instead of
going to the primary source. In some publications, researchers continued down the chain of
secondary interpretation and an unclear representation led to an incorrect interpretation of Denzin’s
work. For example, Patton (2002) cited Denzin and interpreted his definition of data triangulation as
“the use of a variety of sources in a study” (p. 247) and methodological triangulation as “the use of
multiple methods to study a single problem or program” (p. 247). Rather than synthesizing Denzin’s
seminal work, Yin (2014) cited Patton’s text and noted that “Patton (2002) discusses four types of
triangulation in doing evaluations” and identified data triangulation as “of different sources” and
methodological triangulation as “of methods” (p. 120). Patton (2002) provided a good introductory
text and introduced the basic concept of triangulation, leaving the reader to look up Denzin’s work
for more detail. Yin is a leader in case study research; however, in this case, he elaborated on
Patton’s basic interpretation and stated that data triangulation “is to collect information from
multiple sources but aimed at collaborating the same finding” (Yin, 2014, p. 120). Yin went on to
provide examples of multiple sources one can use for data triangulation as documents, archival
records, open-ended interviews, participant and direct observations, and so forth, which appears to
contradict Denzin’s definitions. When one looks at the concept of triangulation through a chain of
interpretations rather than going to the seminal source, one can add to the confusion in the
literature. When one goes back to the seminal source and looks at Denzin’s (1989) definitions, one
would find that “data triangulation has three subtypes: (a) time, (b) space, and (c) persons,” whereas
“methodological triangulation can entail within-method and between-method triangulations” (p.
237). We argue that researchers should identify the seminal (original) sources in their reading and
critically read the seminal scholars’ work to ensure that they are not creating more ambiguity. 