Abstract
Cronbach’s alpha is a statistic commonly quoted by authors to demonstrate that tests and scales that have been constructed or adopted for research projects are fit for purpose. Cronbach’s alpha is regularly adopted in studies in science education: it was referred to in 69 different papers published in 4 leading science education journals in a single year (2015)—usually as a measure of reliability. This article explores how this statistic is used in reporting science education research and what it represents. Authors often cite alpha values with little commentary to explain why they feel this statistic is relevant and seldom interpret the result for readers beyond citing an arbitrary threshold for an acceptable value. Those authors who do offer readers qualitative descriptors interpreting alpha values adopt a diverse and seemingly arbitrary terminology. More seriously, illustrative examples from the science education literature demonstrate that alpha may be acceptable even when there are recognised problems with the scales concerned. Alpha is also sometimes inappropriately used to claim an instrument is unidimensional. It is argued that a high value of alpha offers limited evidence of the reliability of a research instrument, and that indeed a very high value may actually be undesirable when developing a test of scientific knowledge or understanding. Guidance is offered to authors reporting, and readers evaluating, studies that present Cronbach’s alpha statistic as evidence of instrument quality.

Similar content being viewed by others

Objective Measurement in Psychometric Analysis
Chapter © 2020

An Empirical Assessment of Guttman’s Lambda 4 Reliability Coefficient
Chapter © 2015

Measurement in STEM education research: a systematic literature review of trends in the psychometric evidence of scales
Article Open access
02 June 2023
Introduction
Science education research often involves the adoption of existing, or the development of new, instruments to measure phenomena of interest. In the present paper, two particular types of instrument are considered, scales and tests. Scales are here considered to measure constructs in the affective domain, such as attitudes. Tests are here considered to measure cognitive features such as knowledge and understanding of science concepts and topics.

When choosing an instrument, or developing a new instrument, for a study, a researcher is expected to consider the relevance of the instrument to particular research questions (National Research Council Committee on Scientific Principles for Educational Research, 2002) as well as the quality of the instrument. Quality may traditionally be understood in terms of such notions as validity (the extent to which an instrument measures what it claims to measure, rather than something else) and reliability (the extent to which an instrument can be expected to give the same measured outcome when measurements are repeated) (Taber, 2013a).

In a physical sciences context, we might expect to be able to test reliability by taking repeated measurements to see how consistent the readings are. A high reliability does not ensure accuracy (for example, an ammeter which has not been properly calibrated may give very consistent repeat readings, without these being accurate) but does provide a basis for making inferences about changes (an increase in the reading on an ammeter which is poorly calibrated but has shown to give repeatable readings can be inferred to indicate an increased current). However, when an instrument does not give reliable readings, it may be difficult to distinguish genuine changes in what we are seeking to measure from changes in readings that are an artefact of the unreliability of the instrument.

In educational research, it may be quite difficult to test the reliability of an instrument such as an attitude scale or a knowledge test by simply undertaking repeated readings because human beings are constantly changing due to experiences between instrument administrations, and also because they may undergo changes due to the experience of the measurement process itself. So, a student may answer a set of questions, and that very activity may set in chain thinking processes that lead to new insights or further integration of knowledge. A day, week, or month later, the student may answer the same questions differently for no other reason than that responding to the original test provided a learning experience.

The present article takes the form of a methodological critique, focused on one measure commonly associated with instrument reliability in science education research (Cronbach’s alpha). The genesis of this study was dissatisfaction with the treatment of Cronbach’s alpha in some papers I was reading in relation to my own scholarship and—in particular—as a referee or editor. The impression developed was that although this statistic was often quoted by authors of science education studies submitted for publication, it was not always made clear what the statistic represented, or why it was relevant, or why some particular value was (or was not) desirable. This impression was tested, and reinforced, by looking to see how Cronbach’s alpha was applied in published studies in the field. An initial informal search suggested these concerns did not simply reflect the treatment of alpha in a few isolated papers but were more widespread and led to the identification of examples that illustrated points worthy of raising within the research community. A more systematic investigation of the use of the statistic in a sample of science education papers published in leading journals in the field in 2015 was then undertaken. This paper presents findings from that survey, to illustrate the extent and nature of the use of Cronbach’s alpha in published reports of science education in highly regarded journals in the field, as well as exploring identified issues of concern by discussing examples from the literature consulted.

The focus on science education here is not intended to suggest that studies in this field are more problematic in this regard than those in other fields (which were not examined for the present study). Rather, this methodological critique has been prepared from within the context of science education because it is believed that the issues identified will be relevant to others who engage with research in this field (as authors, as editors and reviewers, and as readers) and that recommendations could be developed which will be useful to colleagues in the field when preparing or evaluating research reports. It is hoped that by locating this critique within the substantive field, and by illustrating points with examples from the science education literature, the study will be visible and accessible to others engaging with this body of literature.

The present article is organised into three main parts. It begins by exploring current practice in science education by describing how Cronbach’s alpha is used within published studies in science education. Some illustrative examples that highlight particular issues relating to practice in reporting the alpha statistic are explored from studies reporting the development and/or use of instruments designed to measure affective constructs or aspects of cognition (such as student knowledge). This offers a context for discussing the nature of Cronbach’s alpha itself, and the reason this statistic was originally introduced, and so its potential role in instrument development and evaluation. This then provides a basis for critiquing some common practises used by authors reporting the statistic in their research reports in science education. In particular, some assumptions that are commonly explicit or implicit in research reports —that alpha should be as high as possible and that a high alpha can be taken as a sign of instrument quality—will be questioned, in particular in relation to the development of instruments to test science knowledge and understanding. This then leads to some recommendations for good practice for authors regarding how the statistic should be presented in studies reporting instrument development or application in science education and advice for those reading science education reports on identifying features of good and more questionable practice.

The Use of Cronbach’s Alpha in Science Education Studies
It is common to see the reliability of instruments used in published science education studies framed in terms of a statistic known as Cronbach’s alpha (Cronbach, 1951). Cronbach’s alpha has been described as ‘one of the most important and pervasive statistics in research involving test construction and use’ (Cortina, 1993, p. 98) to the extent that its use in research with multiple-item measurements is considered routine (Schmitt, 1996, p. 350). Alpha is commonly reported for the development of scales intended to measure attitudes and other affective constructs. However, the literature also includes reports of the development of tests of student knowledge and understanding that cite Cronbach’s alpha as an indicator of instrument quality.

The Frequency of Use of Cronbach’s Alpha in Science Education
To give an indication of the extent to which Cronbach’s alpha is used in science education research, a survey was undertaken of papers published in issues of four prestigious science education journals during one academic year. The 2015 volume of the journals were surveyed as this was the most recent year for which a full volume was available. The journals selected were those most widely considered to be high-status research journals and which routinely included reports of empirical work across science education. These are International Journal of Science Education (IJSE, Volume 37, comprising 18 issues), Journal of Research in Science Teaching (JRST, Volume 52, comprising 10 issues), Research in Science Education (RISE, Volume 45, comprising 6 issues—some articles in this volume are cited as 2014 according to the publisher’s metadata, reflecting their first publication on line) and Science Education (SE, Volume 99, comprising 6 issues). The choice of these journals was intended to ensure that all articles considered would have been subjected to rigorous peer review.

The on-line search facility provided by each journal publisher (Taylor & Francis for IJSE; Wiley for JRST and SE; Springer for RISE) was used to find articles listed as being published in the 2015 volume that included the word Cronbach in the text, in order to identify articles that made explicit reference to Cronbach’s alpha. Seventy articles were initially identified, although one of these did not explicitly refer to the alpha statistic (but appeared in the initial screen as it included a citation to a paper by Cronbach). There were therefore 69 explicit references to Cronbach’s alpha in papers published in the four science education journals in their volumes for 2015.

The figure of 69 explicit references to Cronbach’s alpha likely underestimates the actual level of reference to this statistic in the volumes surveyed as authors may refer to [Cronbach’s] alpha values without specifying the specific statistical test being used. For example, one paper in the IJSE volume surveyed (Bathgate, Crowell, Schunn, Cannady, & Dorph, 2015) made two references to an unspecified alpha statistic. Bathgate and colleagues describe developing “a measure of students’ ability to make effective arguments in science” (p.1596) for which “the overall instrument had acceptable reliability (alpha = .77),” and a “knowledge test administered before and after the 4-month classroom unit on weather and climate” which comprised “21 items, alpha = .78” (p.1600). It seems very likely that this statistic is the Cronbach alpha. Similarly, a paper in the 2015 volume of JRST described a post-test with items “designed expressly for the study” where they found that “two of the items did not discriminate understanding of the deep structure as intended, reducing the reliability statistic (Alpha) for the test. We discarded these two items. The remaining four post-test questions…were fairly reliable, α = 0.70” (Shemwell, Chase, & Schwartz, 2015, p. 68). Again, it seems likely from the context that the statistic referred to here is Cronbach’s alpha, although this was not explicitly stated.

As such examples can only be assumed to report the Cronbach alpha (as there are other statistics labelled alpha), they were not included in the survey, and no attempt was made to systematically identify such papers in the sampled volumes. It would seem to be good practice for authors citing statistical results to be unambiguous about the particular statistical tests they have carried out, rather than leaving readers to infer this from the context. Of the 69 articles that explicitly referred to Cronbach’s alpha, 64 cited values of alpha, including 61 which reported values of alpha as new results. These differences arise because some papers mentioned alpha in explaining the choices of statistics applied, but did not report values of alpha, and some papers cited alpha values from research reviewed, but did not report the statistic from new empirical work reported.

Describing the Significance of Alpha
Authors who report results for Cronbach’s alpha describe or explain the meaning of the alpha statistic in various ways—and some cite the statistic without any explanation at all. The articles identified in the 2015 volumes of the four research journals surveyed (IJSE, JRST, RISE, SE) were examined to see how authors who cited values of alpha (64 articles) described it. The most common descriptors were (separately or together) reliability or internal consistency. Twelve articles used both of these terms, including one paper that described alpha in terms of internal consistency, reliability, and also discriminating power,

In this study, Cronbach’s coefficient α was used to calculate the internal consistency coefficients of the items included in the questionnaire through a pilot study with 42 science teachers. Results of the reliability analysis showed that the items in the six scales had a satisfactory discriminating power. (Mansour, 2015, p. 1773)

As this quotation shows, authors considering reliability and internal consistency as equivalent may assume that this is understood by readers and does not need to be explicitly stated. In some cases, the shift between terms was clear enough. So, for example, in a study concerned with gender differences in motivation and engagement of senior secondary physics students (Abraham & Barker 2014), alpha is directly linked with both terms: “In preliminary analysis, we examined the Cronbach’s alpha estimate of internal consistency of each a priori scale… Specifically, support for the six-factor model requires (a) acceptable reliability for each scale (i.e. alpha = 0.70 or above)…” (p.63, emphases added). Sometimes, however, such explicit linking is absent, as in a study exploring biology undergraduates’ conceptions related to learning and their self-efficacy (Lin, Liang, & Tsai, 2015), which reported on a questionnaire drawing upon a previously published instrument. Lin and colleagues made explicit references to Cronbach’s alpha as a reliability coefficient in the context of discussing the source instrument and the new empirical results. However, it was left to readers to appreciate that internal consistency was being considered as synonymous to reliability:

For the overall reliability, the Cronbach’s alpha value was .80. The alpha values of the 2 subscales were .88 and .89… the revealed values of skewness (at least less than 2) and kurtosis (at least less than 7) … suggested normal distribution of the data. The results indicated the satisfactory level of construct validity and internal consistency of this modified questionnaire. Also, it was suitable to measure the university students’ conceptions of learning biology. (pp.454–455)

A reader who did not appreciate that the authors were using the two different terms interchangeably might find it difficult to unpack the logical thread (“overall reliability, the Cronbach’s alpha value was .80… The results indicated the satisfactory level of…internal consistency…”) from the wider textual context.

Most (44/64) of the articles reporting results including alpha values did refer to alpha as reliability—including one exploring perceptions related to global warming that suggested it should not necessarily be seen a measure of internal consistency as “while Cronbach’s alphas are the standard value reported for scale reliability, this value tends to underestimate the internal consistency of scales consisting of fewer than 10 items” (Herman, 2015, p. 8) and offered mean inter-item correlation values as an alternative measure of internal consistency.

Some of the articles in the sample qualified the term reliability or linked it to some other descriptor. One article referred to it as interrater reliability (and another paper in the sample used alpha in that way), one as reliability of separation and two as internal reliability. One paper equated alpha with both reliability and congruence. One of the papers that described alpha as reliability implied it related to items fitting on a single scale. Two other papers (that did not use the terms reliability or internal consistency) did specify that alpha was concerned with items being on a single scale or unidimensionality (as will be discussed later in this article, Cronbach’s alpha does not provide evidence of scale unidimensionality.)

One paper that referred to alpha as internal consistency also used the alternative term coherence (Wild, 2015). This study, that explored chemistry learners’ perceptions of learning environment and Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) career expectations, modified a previously reported instrument. When discussing the previously published instrument, alpha was described as internal consistency (“Research using the CLES with American elementary, middle, and high school students has found high internal consistency (0.93 ≤ Cronbach’s α ≤ 0.94)”, p. 2290), but when discussing the new analysis undertaken, the alternative term was used (“The perception of a CLE item showed high coherence (Cronbach’s α = 0.90)”, p. 2290) albeit in a subsection titled “Internal consistency and factor analyses”.

Alpha was therefore found to be used as an indicator of reliability, interrater reliability, reliability of separation, internal reliability, internal consistency, congruence, unidimensionality and/or coherence. However, 8 of the 64 articles (i.e. 1 in 8) that cited values for alpha did so without offering any indication at all of what the statistic signified.

Characterising Values of Cronbach’s Alpha
Many, but not all, of the papers found to cite alpha values in the 2015 volumes of four science education journals (IJSE, JRST, RISE, SE) offered qualitative interpretations of the significance of the values calculated in relation to what was being measured (which, as discussed above, was usually considered as a form of reliability or internal consistency). Some papers also offered indications of alpha having a threshold or cut-off as an acceptable, sufficient or satisfactory level. This was normally seen as ≥0.70 (five instances) or >0.70 (three instances) although one article more vaguely referred to “the acceptable values of 0.7 or 0.6” (Griethuijsen et al., 2014).

A wide range of different qualitative descriptors was used by authors to interpret alpha values calculated. These descriptors are reported here (and represented graphically in Fig. 1) with the range (except where a descriptor was only applied to a single value in the sample) representing the highest and lowest values labelled that way in articles surveyed. So, alpha values were described as excellent (0.93–0.94), strong (0.91–0.93), reliable (0.84–0.90), robust (0.81), fairly high (0.76–0.95), high (0.73–0.95), good (0.71–0.91), relatively high (0.70–0.77), slightly low (0.68), reasonable (0.67–0.87), adequate (0.64–0.85), moderate (0.61–0.65), satisfactory (0.58–0.97), acceptable (0.45–0.98), sufficient (0.45–0.96), not satisfactory (0.4–0.55) and low (0.11). Figure 1 offers a visual indication of the wide range of values labelled by some of these descriptors (e.g. acceptable, sufficient) in the sampled studies. This diverse list of terms suggests that there is no clear consensus on the most appropriate labels to use to describe the values obtained when calculating alpha. Figure 1 also suggests there is no clear hierarchy within the range of terms (e.g. high cf. fairly high; not satisfactory overlapping with sufficient and acceptable) used across different scholars, so that terminology seems to be somewhat arbitrary.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Qualitative descriptors used for values/ranges of values of Cronbach’s alpha reported in papers in leading science education journals

Full size image
The common notion of there being a threshold of acceptability for alpha values, if only as a rule of thumb (Plummer & Tanis Ozcelik, 2015), was not always seen as implying that lower values of alpha should be taken as indicating an unsatisfactory instrument. Griethuijsen et al. (2014) reported a cross-national study looking at student interests in science where “several of the values calculated for Cronbach’s alpha are below the acceptable values of 0.7 or 0.6” (p.588). For example, an “interest in school science” factor was based on a subset of five questionnaire items with Cronbach’s alpha of 0.502 (p.589), and the “interest in domestic activities” factor was based on a subset of three items with alpha of 0.446 (p.590). The authors justified continuing with their analysis using the data collected in these administrations by arguing that “slightly increasing the number of items would lead to acceptable values for Cronbach’s alpha” (p.589).

Examples of Alpha Cited in Measuring Affective Constructs
Many examples could be cited of studies where Cronbach’s alpha is used in characterising questionnaires aimed at measuring features in the affective domain (attitude, motivation and the like). Examples are presented here that have been selected to illustrate some key features of the use of this statistic in research in science education.

Tuan and colleagues (Tuan, Chin, & Shieh, 2005) report a study “to develop a questionnaire that measures students’ motivation toward science learning” (p.639). The questionnaire included items relating to six distinct scales—‘self-efficacy, active learning strategies, science learning value, performance goal, achievement goal and learning environment stimulation’, considered to reflect different “factors of motivation” (p.643). These distinct factors are described in the paper for readers. Tuan, Chin and Shieh report that “construct validity was verified by factor analysis”, and they present a table showing how each of the items in the questionnaire has a factor loading above 0.4 on one, and only one, of the scales. That is, in a well-designed instrument with several scales, the response patterns of an item intended to be part of a particular scale should be more similar to response patterns of the other items on that scale than the items on the other scales that are intended to be associated with a different construct or aspect.

The authors used the Cronbach alpha coefficient as a measure of “the internal consistency of the six scales”. They report that “the Cronbach alpha reliability coefficient for each scale, using an individual student as the unit of analysis, ranged between 0.87 and 0.70” which they considered “generally satisfactory” (p.644) (n.b. generally satisfactory is another variation on those descriptors found in the survey of 2015 studies, shown in Fig. 1). Tuan, Chin and Shieh also explored the degree of distinctness of the different scales, reporting that “the discriminative validity ranged from 0.09 to 0.51, showing the independence of each scale and also somewhat overlapping with other scales” (p.646). That is, they calculated the mean correlation for each of the scales with the five other scales and obtained (in ascending value) results of 0.09, 0.30, 0.31, 0.32, 0.39 and 0.51. It would be suspect if the correlations between these scales were very high, as that would suggest that the sets of items making up the different scales were not measuring different factors. What is of interest for the present discussion however is that the authors quote a value of Cronbach’s alpha for the instrument as a whole, again when taking the individual student as the unit of analysis, and this is reported as 0.91 (p.646). That is, the measure used for internal consistency across the whole questionnaire (0.91) is greater than any of the coefficients (0.70, 0.75, 0.80, 0.81, 0.82, 0.87) obtained for the six somewhat overlapping scales from which it was composed. This is a point returned to later in this paper.

There are many other examples of authors quoting high alpha values for multi-construct scales. In a study exploring self-regulation of biology learning, Eilam and Reiter (2014) adopted the Learning and Study Strategies Inventory, a 76-item instrument comprising of 10 scales. The authors report Cronbach alpha values for each scale and for the instrument overall, and again, the overall value is higher than that of the distinct scales (0.91 cf. 0.73, 0.75, 0.76, 0.79, 0.83, 0.84, 0.86, 0.87, 0.89, 0.89, p.716). These values are reported without any explanation, interpretation or comment, presumably because the authors (and one supposes the experts who peer reviewed the manuscript for the journal) consider their relevance self-evident and not requiring commentary.

Heddy and Sinatra (2013) report a study looking at both affect and conceptual change in learning about evolution. One of the instruments they used in this study was an Evolution Emotions Survey that they published in full in their paper. The instrument was used to explore a range of emotions: “enjoyment, hope, pride, anger, anxiety, shame, hopelessness, boredom” (p.729). Among the items included in the instrument were I enjoy being in class, I am full of hope, I feel frustrated in class, I feel nervous in class, I am ashamed, I have lost all hope of understanding this class and I find this class fairly dull, providing face validity at least that the items in the different scales were indeed eliciting responses based on different emotions. The authors did not report Cronbach’s alpha for the scales for these distinct emotions, but rather offered readers the statistic for the overall instrument as being 0.97. Their interpretation of this statistic was that “reliabilities for the emotions survey were excellent” (p.729). The desirability of such a high value of alpha, close to the theoretical limit of 1, seems to be assumed, but this will be questioned later in this article.

Another study that used Cronbach’s alpha in characterising an instrument developed for measuring affect in science education is “Developing attitude to science scales for use with children of ages from five to eleven years” (Pell & Jarvis, 2001) which “reports on the development stages of three attitudes to science and school scales for use with children aged from 5 to 11 years” (p,847). Pell and Jarvis report that ‘Attitude subscales measure “liking school”, “independent investigator”, “science enthusiasm”, the “social context” of science and “science as a difficult subject” with Cronbach Alpha reliabilities for the year groups varying from above 0.8 to below 0.7’ (p.847). That is, in common with many other authors (see above), Pell and Jarvis consider alpha to reflect the reliability of a scale of instrument.

Of particular interest here is that the alpha value obtained reflects the specific sample tested. Pell and Jarvis included different age pupils in their study and reported that a subscale they labelled liking school “is most reliable when measuring the attitudes of the youngest pupils. At year 1, reliability = 0.83, N = 41, whereas by year 6, reliability has progressively reduced to r = 0.66, N = 166” (p.853). They argued that some items in their scale were more associated with being in school by respondents in some age groups than others, such that those items were able to elicit the desired construct better with younger children. By contrast, Lamb, Akmal and Petrie (2015) in a study “to investigate content, cognitive and affective outcomes related to STEM integrated curriculum” (p.410) explain lower reliabilities of an instrument administered to kindergarten pupils (as compared to second and fifth grade pupils) as due to “the varying ability of kindergarteners to interpret questions and responses” (p.422). This reflects how Cronbach’s alpha cannot be seen as a measure of a scale or instrument per se but only of its application to a particular sample of respondents.

Examples of Alpha Cited in Measuring Cognitive Constructs
Cronbach’s alpha is also widely used by those designing tests of student knowledge and understanding, again as an indicator of instrument quality. Casanoves, González, Salvadó, Haro & Novo (2015) report a study of the attitudes towards and knowledge of biotechnology among Spanish university students’ preparing for teaching. The knowledge component was a 21-item instrument asking respondents to judge whether statements were true or false. This instrument was said to measure “knowledge level of biotechnology and genetics” and it was reported that “the reliability (Cronbach’s α) of the knowledge questionnaire was .721” (p.2930). In this example then, alpha was used to offer evidence of reliability of the 21 items collectively in assessing “knowledge level of biotechnology and genetics” implicitly treated as a unitary construct.

Other authors similarly suggest or imply that a high value of Cronbach’s alpha is desirable when a test of knowledge includes items testing across a range of different science concepts. Yang, Lin, She and Huang (2015, pp. 1572–1573) report using “a two-tier multiple-choice diagnostic instrument developed to measure the degree of students’ conceptual understanding in science (Cronbach’s α = 0.81…)” as a measure of prior knowledge across six diverse topics: “(1) the classification of substances, (2) fire prevention, (3) thermal convection, (4) chemical reaction rates, (5) sound waves and (6) mass conservation” (p.1571). Howe and colleagues report using knowledge tests each covering a range of concepts in the forces topic for which they considered values of Cronbach alpha offered grounds for regarding test scores as lying on single scale (Howe et al., 2014, p. 173), whilst Mumba and colleagues (Mumba, Mbewe, & Chabalengula, 2015) reported an alpha value of 0.83 for a wide-ranging conceptual knowledge test in the topic of light.

Some other studies reporting knowledge assessment instruments in areas of science recognise that the target knowledge has multiple aspects. One such study is “An analysis of 16–17-year-old students’ understanding of solution chemistry concepts using a two-tier diagnostic instrument’ (Adadan & Savasci, 2011) which ‘focused on the development of a two-tier multiple-choice diagnostic instrument, which was designed and then progressively modified and implemented to assess students’ understanding of solution chemistry concepts” (p.513). These authors developed an instrument that (in its final version) comprised 13 items that explored student understandings of aspects of solution chemistry “in multiple contexts with multiple modes and levels of representation”. Six aspects of solution chemistry were represented (p.519):

the nature of solutions and dissolving,

factors affecting the solubility of solids,

factors affecting the solubility of gases,

the types of solutions relative to the solubility of a solute,

the concentration of solutions﻿, and﻿

the electrical conductivity of solutions.

The authors provided information on how they understood each of these aspects.

Adadan and Savasci call upon the Cronbach alpha statistic and relate it to both the terms reliability and internal consistency:

The reliability of [the Nature of Solutions and Solubility—Diagnostic Instrument] was represented by using the Cronbach alpha coefficient. Cronbach alpha values of 0.7 or higher indicate acceptable internal consistency...The reliability coefficients for the content tier and both tiers were found to be 0.697 and 0.748, respectively (p.524).

In recommending their instrument for classroom use, the authors note that some of the items were found to be of high difficultly but claim that “the test is robust enough that even if...any two or three items considered to be difficult...are removed from the test, the Cronbach alpha reliability would not drop below the acceptable value of 0.70” (p.539). For Adadan and Savasci then, a critical value of alpha of 0.70 offers evidence of the reliability/internal consistency of an instrument that explores student understanding of six distinct aspects of a scientific topic area across different contexts, modes, and levels of representation.

A somewhat similar use was made of Cronbach alpha reliabilities by Arslan, Cigdemoglu and Moseley (2012), who report a “three-tier diagnostic test to assess pre-service teachers’ misconceptions about global warming, greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, and acid rain” through the development of the atmosphere-related environmental problems diagnostic test (AREPDiT). Their third tier asked students about their confidence in item responses to “differentiate a lack of knowledge from a misconception” (p.1667). The authors describe the development of their instrument and how “after the revision of the first version, the Cronbach alpha coefficient of the second version increased from 0.60 to 0.74, which can be considered acceptable according to criterion-referenced tests” (p.1677). However, Arslan and colleagues did not offer readers any guidance on the sense in which the instrument should be considered acceptable because of this statistical result.

It was reported above how Tuan, Chin and Shieh used factor analysis to confirm that the items associated with their different scales in their questionnaire did indeed load upon the intended scales. Arslan, Cigdemoglu and Moseley however reported that in the case of their three-tier instrument “although an exploratory factor analysis on pre-service teachers’ total score was conducted, reasonable factors were not obtained.” They suggested that “this could be because the items are loosely related to each other and do not measure either a single atmosphere related environmental concept or the three dimensions (nature, consequences, and solutions) of [global warming, greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, and acid rain]” (p.1679). So in this study, items that were considered to be “loosely related to each other,” and not to measure understanding of a single concept, collectively gave rise to an alpha value “considered acceptable”, providing a warrant for the authors to claim “The AREPDiT proved to be a valid and reliable diagnostic instrument to explore the knowledge and misconceptions of pre-service teachers” (p.1683).

Another recent study using alpha to characterise an instrument reported a “conceptual inventory of natural selection as a tool for measuring Greek university students’ evolution knowledge” (Athanasiou & Mavrikaki, 2013), which set out to “compare various groups of Greek university students for their level of knowledge of evolution by means of natural selection" (p.1269). The groups comprised of biology specialists at different stages of university study (post-graduate, final year undergraduates, other undergraduates) and non-specialists who either were or were not taking subsidiary biology courses. The authors here used an existing instrument, the Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection (CNIS), originally published in English and translated it into Greek for use in their local context.

Athanasiou and Mavrikaki noted some problems with the instrument, reporting that “a principal components analysis revealed problems with the items designed to assess the concepts of population stability, differential survival and variation inheritable, therefore these items need to be reconsidered” (p.1262). They suggested that their analysis of how different items loaded upon different constructs “pose a question about the internal validity of the CINS” (p.1270). Despite this, the authors also reported that “the reliability of the Greek CINS was estimated as very good” (p.1269), a judgement which was based upon a value of Cronbach’s alpha of 0.877 for their complete sample. Values of Cronbach’s alpha were also quoted for the different groups of students (0.65, 0.78, 0.87, 0.88, 0.91), now described as offering “estimated coefficients of internal consistency” (p.1269). These were interpreted as “good” apart from the group with the lowest value (0.65—obtained for those non-biologists who did not attend any biology courses)—which was said to have “a poor but acceptable Cronbach’s alpha” (p.1270).

As suggested above, then, the values for Cronbach’s alpha apply to the particular sample responding on a particular occasion and should not be assumed to be a fixed feature of the scale or instrument. This is reinforced by a study undertaken to explore undergraduates’ understandings of acid strength. Bretz and McClary (2014) found that the alpha value obtained from repeated administrations of their diagnostic instrument to a group of 52 students shifted from 0.39 to 0.54 over a period of three months. Taken at face value, their diagnostic instrument—a fixed set of items—became more reliable, or more internally consistent, over time. Bretz and McClary report that the “students had three months additional instruction (including concepts about acid strength) between the pre/post-administrations” (p.214). It seems that the items in the instrument became more similar in terms of the responses they elicited from these particular learners after the students had experienced additional formal teaching about the canonical scientific concepts being tested: something to be both expected and welcomed (and a finding consistent with Athanasiou and Mavrikaki’s finding that reliability in their study was lowest for the group of students who had not been formally taught biology in higher education). A similar finding was reported by Berger and Hänze (2015) in a study of teaching physics through the jigsaw cooperative learning technique where internal consistency, as measured by alpha, increased from 0.45 before instruction to 0.60 after teaching. This underlines how the alpha statistic always relates to a particular administration of an instrument.